I said, I told you that I traded that, and you can
have whatever you can get out of it. So that's what
happened. He got me that Marine air wing in, and
that helped a lot. What about the B-52s now? B-52s,
I got all of those for 30 hours. And sure enough, the
enemy attacked at 5.30 in the morning.
And to give you an idea about what you learn about
the enemy, how they're going to work, and where
they're going to hit you, and how they fight. You
accumulate this knowledge over a period of time.
I ran northeast of town a B-52 strike at 5.30 in the
morning when they were attacking, and I aimed that
at a VC regiment. that I knew that was in that area
because of my radio intercept capability. And I
knew they were going to be attacking. And I wanted
to coordinate a strike of three B-52s with
108 500 pounders on each B-52
in an area 500 meters wide and 1,500 meters long.
500 meters wide and 1,500 meters long. I wanted to
concentrate all those bombs in there right on that
damn regiment. Must have made just one crater.
Almost. Well, what happened was I found out later
that I had a little captain, 33 Rangers left out of
600 protecting that area. Started out on it back on
the 5th of April with 600 Rangers there and my one
little American captain advisor. Now I'm down to a
little American captain and 33 Vietnamese
Rangers and they're gonna be hit by this regiment.
Well, that strike Went in right on time at 5.30. And
lo and behold, I caught only the leading scout
elements of this regiment.
And pretty well mutilated them except one little
lieutenant with blood. You know, that concussion
is pretty tough from that amount of stuff. blood
coming from his ears and from his nose just kept
moving forward and the 33 Rangers, they picked him
up. He gave up. He was a VC. Yeah, he was a VC. So he
said to them,
you hit the leading elements and the instructions
were that everybody in the regiment go get in those
holes because they know that that guy is not going
to strike again in the same place. Now this is at 10
o'clock.
Word came to me, I was airborne in the area, ducking
SA-7 missiles, handheld missiles, and 51
caliber. They were shooting handheld missiles?
Yeah, anything that's flying But I had to be here.
Were you taking some hits? Huh? You must have been
taking some hits. Oh, they knocked down five of
them, our Cobra helicopters. Just cut them out of
the sky.
So, American captain called the general, you
know, dick around. You call the guy that can do
things. He said, here's what it is, and they're in
those holes. And this is at 10 o'clock. I said,
Roger, thank you very much. I said, uh, Thank you
very, very much. And I looked on my schedule B-52s.
At 10.50 I had another flight coming in, coming in
every 55 minutes. And now, remember, it takes two
hours, ordinary time, two hours, and you check
with everybody in the world to divert one flight
from one place to another of three birds. Two
hours. To show you how professional our United
States Air Force is and the Strategic Air Command,
I called in direct and bypassed every guy in the
whole chain of the Air Force and said, Here's the
situation. Call them direct in the air. And you
were talking to Saigon? I was talking, no, hell, I
was talking to the leader of the flight. And Saigon
was monitoring. And I said, here's the situation.
I got a whole regiment in the holes of strike number
such and such this morning. I want this strike
diverted. using same data, same basis as strike
number such and such at 0530.
Roger that. They had 20 minutes to divert, change
the course, came in, dropped,
and after it was all over with on the 18th of May,
only 13 members of that whole regiment survived.
13 members out of about 2,100 survived.
Now that's what you have to do to win and you know
what one regiment would do against 33 little
Rangers and one little American captain.
So You know, whatever you do, wherever you are,
military or otherwise, you can succeed. It all
depends on how bad you want to do it, you know. Tell
me about the rest of the Viet Cong and the rest of the
North Vietnamese force in the area now. Didn't
they attack? Oh hell, they were attacking all the
time. And as I say, it took 30 hours. There were 55
minutes, three B-52s. And some, and we extended
some a little bit beyond that. But I interlaced in a
24-hour period 399 sorties of attack air against
their tanks. We knocked the little Vietnamese,
took the little old light anti-tank weapon that
nobody said was any good, the Law, and they knocked
out those guys in town. I showed you the picture of
some of them. Knocked the guys out in town. We
knocked one out by air, a guy named Gordy Weed, a
lieutenant colonel in the United States Air
Force, phenomenal pilot. and ground support guy
with what we called an old T-38 trainer. We had
converted some of those to combat and they were
carrying bombs and the weather is down and nobody
could fly, but he was up with a flight and he came in
and he said, we said, there's a tank just outside of
the headquarters. And he said, how much clearance
I got from friendlies? And we said, all you need And
he knocked that tank out about 200 meters from the
headquarters there, which could have killed off
all my communications. And then when you lose your
communications, you're in a hell of a shape.
Later on, after things subsided, Sir Robert
Thompson, advisor to, and a great personal friend
of mine, and I love him so much, Sir Robert Thompson
from England was advisor to the President of the
United States. The President sent him over, and
the President, he said, the President asked me to
ask you to take me into UNLOCK because this will be a
very convincing thing to the world that you won the
war. And I did. I've got some pictures of him in
there with the province chief who was a brigadier
who had promoted the brigadier. He was a Marine
Corps colonel at the time as province chief.
And then I had to secretly, unbeknownst to the
United States, take in the president. What? Take
in the president of Vietnam into on-law. He didn't
trust his own people. No, you took President Two
in? Took President Two in, yes, on the 7th of July.
No kidding. Yes. But tell me about that. What kind
of person was he? How was his setting? I thought he
was a phenomenal man. I thought he was a great,
great man, a great presence, dedicated to his
country and to very gracious and kind to the United
States. They had tried to get him to relieve this
corps commander because everybody thought I
ought to have some help. I didn't need any damn
help. I just needed to be left alone, but this was a
Me commanding that corps, you know, was gonna leak
out to the press, which it did, and I denied that I
was commanding the corps, and then I went and got
this sick lieutenant general and got some
pictures of him giving me instructions and me
saluting, you know, to prove that I wasn't
commanding the corps, but I was all hogwash.
Everybody knew, Abrams knew, Dick Nixon knew,
everybody knew I was commanding that damn outfit,
and they were trying to get two, every one of them,
went to him to try to get two to relieve this guy. His
name was Min, M-I-N-N-A.
He's now caretaker of St. Patrick's Cathedral in
New York. Really? Yes. He and his family. So, uh, I,
uh, Of course, it denied commanding the forces. I
rather enjoyed it. I mean, hell, it's a goddamn
good challenge for me. You know,
it's a difficult task. I don't think anybody could
have done it but me. That's what Abram said. And
they're probably right.
Because you just don't find anybody... really in
the world today include the goddamn Soviets that
had the combat experience that I have and at the
levels.
And know how to use air power, which is the key of the
whole thing, is firepower. And how to deliver it
and where to deliver it and what the enemy's gonna
do. You gotta know what the enemy's gonna do. You
can't go drop bombs out here and bust up the woods
and the enemy's over here. You gotta know how in the
hell to do it.
You've got to have a personal feel of him. You've
got to have your hands on him all the time, and with
the electronics capability we have today, you can
keep a hand on him if you know how to use him. That's
a, I've got a, and then let me see now, so you left,
you left Vietnam just about three or four months
after that episode. Yeah, a very interesting
thing, I had my eyes blown away, and I lost this eye
totally on the 6th of April from from rocket fire in
Onlock. And I didn't know it, but it gradually just
went out on me. The shade went down, it was gone.
What it was was a detached retina. Well, the
drawdown over there, we had no ophthalmologist
over there. And I thought, well, maybe this eye is
just tired. It's gone, I can't see it. I've only got
one eye left. So, it's gone. So, finally they got a a
hippie type ophthalmologist that had refused the
draft and refused this and that and the other. He
had accepted military paid for medical schooling
and so on and so forth. He needed Walter Reed and he
didn't want to go to Vietnam and he revolted and
they tried his ass and as a result they sentenced
him to go to Vietnam. Oh, what a sentence. Yeah, and
the son of a bitch got in there in August, and the war
looked like it was over with at that time, so I said,
well, I better go down there. They said they had to
optimize it. I'll go down, and he takes a look at my
eye, and he said, oh, my God, I've got to get you out
of here right now. He said, you've got 90% detached
retina, and he said, it's gone. He said, when did
this occur? I said, well, it started occurring
back on the 6th of April. Well, why didn't you come
in? I said, for what? I said, nobody here. And
everybody's hollering at me to keep the people out
of Saigon. What the hell am I going to do? I go do what
I'm supposed to do, and to hell with my damned eye.
He said, well, you've got to get to Walter Reed
right now. That's on the afternoon of August 31st.
And by God, believe it or not, Vietnamese
presented me their third highest award the next
morning, and I was on the airplane and gone home to
Walter Reed. I stayed in Walter Reed
until December the 22nd,
and finally got this high back to about 2250.
now General Abrams, Chief of Staff of the Army. He
comes out to see me. He said, I'm going to send you
down to Fort Sam Houston to rest up for a few months.
I said, well, I don't think I've got but one eye
left. I think I'll just get out. He said, I'll tell
you what to do. You don't tell me. He said, I'd
rather have you with one eye than most people with
three.
And he said, you keep your mouth shut, you son of a
bitch, but I'm going to give you that tactical army
command and promote you in Korea. You go down there
and get rested up. You sorry bastard. I said, yes,
sir. I'd land in the goddamn bed. Still a patch of
mine. Here's Chief of Staff of the Army, and I'll
talk to you like that. Well, we knew each other very
well. So I went down there. First of July, 1973,
word come down, promote him. Get him to Korea right
away. So we'll do that one tomorrow, okay? Yeah,
but I want to ask you some questions about Vietnam.
Sure. about just Vietnam in general, and you can
stop whenever you want. If you're getting tired of
this, that's okay. Well, it's about six o'clock.
Oh, okay. Do you want to stop then? I can start. I can
answer these questions. Let's hit them early in
the morning. I'll be glad to answer them though.
It's August 20th, Friday. And this is the third
interview with General Hollingsworth. And I
wanted to start off on something that you said. And
I can't remember if I got it on tape or not. If we did,
we can just edit this out. And that is that you said,
after on lock, that someone said that there's only
two fighting generals left in the Army, you and
Abrams. Now, who, when, and where? That was Ward
Just in his book. And I think, I want to have a copy of
that, but I'm not certain. What book was this one
that he wrote? War Just, I think it was War and
People, I believe that was the name of it. I think
you just have to look through the library. I can't
recall it right off. But that was his comment.
What's your feelings about that comment?
Well, Abrams and I had been considered the two best
tank leaders in World War II. And I don't think
either one of us had backed away from the fact that
we probably were. You see? Yeah. And that
we
never talked about it,
but I think we enjoyed the fact that others did. And
this came, I guess, from our aggressive attitudes
initiative. intuitive ways of feeling and seeing
a problem and I guess some God given attributes in
this regard for having a personal feel for people
and what it takes to be successful in battle and
I'll have to say that I give credit to the big man on
high for looking after a very young fellow who'd
had no experience in warfare, wasn't frightened
of it, but learned, took advantage of the everyday
to learn something and then to apply it. And I am
very grateful for that. It makes you feel you're
destined to do things and do something and that you
just continue to go. That's the reason I just
continue to work now and financially I don't have
to. But
in my own mind I haven't accomplished anything yet
so I'm still looking to accomplish something. No,
no. Did you ever receive a survey from a brigadier
general named Douglas Kinnard, K-I-N-N-A-R-D,
asking you to comment about a number of different
topics of Vietnam after the war was over? The
survey probably went out in 1975 or so. Possibly I
did, yes. But you don't remember? I don't remember
specifically. Well, Kinnard wrote a book called
The War Managers, and there is... There were other
two colonels who wrote a book on the Army who were in
Vietnam and then retired and wrote a book on the
Army. And for the most part, these books take the
Army to task and bring out some real problems,
which I'd like to ask you about. Sure. These are
military men saying that things went wrong and
everybody is to blame, but part of it was the
military. And so I'd like to ask you about some of
these things. One is careerism. As you know, the
combat tour of duty, for the most part, was six
months. And a number of these critics say that six
months just wasn't long enough to get to know your
men, get to know the area that you were in command
of, and go out and do a good job. You should have been
in command for a much longer time. What's your
response to that? I totally agree with that if
you're in the United States in training.
But you're supposed to be trained before you go to
combat. And if you're trying to train in combat and
getting soldiers killed, that's when General
Hollingsworth would relieve you so damn quick it
wasn't even funny.
That was no training ground for commanders. That
was a battleground. and uh and a commander going
over to learn to command a battalion in battle and
get men killed I wouldn't tolerate that 30 minutes
and that's the reason why I was criticized for
relieving so many battalion commanders I didn't
relieve many I just relieved those who uh that
needed to be relieved those who after 30 to 60 days
were still doing foolish things and getting men
and his life's in jeopardy, and so he needed to be
relieved. It was in his own best interest that he be
relieved of that responsibility.
So, was this typical that you'd have to relieve? I
mean, were there a lot of untrained people?
Because the command was only six months? Well, it
really wasn't six months. It really wasn't six
months. It depended a lot on the capabilities of
the individual.
I can tell you that I can name off 25
or 30 battalion commanders that had 12 months of
command over there. And I'll tell you, it's a
devastating thing for a man that was fighting
every day, 45 years old, or 40 years old as a
lieutenant colonel, fighting every day with 18
and 19-year-olds through the jungle. And I don't
care how physically fit you are or how tough you
think you are, it's one hell of a mental and
physical battle for a 40-year-old. I requested
that the Army provide the 1st Infantry Division,
and General DePue did the same thing, that we have
30-year-old battalion commanders. And the Chief
of Staff of the Army came back and said, the Army
cannot meet your requirements.
And I thought to myself, here you are conducting a
peacetime promotion and career officer program
in a war zone. And this makes no sense to anybody. A
good commander should have been left over there. A
good captain, company commander, should have
been left over there until he commanded the
division if the war lasted that long enough and he
was physically and mentally fit and promote him
every six months if necessary depending on his
capabilities. That's what they did to me during
the war and there's no reason why you shouldn't
have done that over there. There was no such thing
as a career when I was in World War II. And the same
thing in Korea. So there is what Kennerly is
probably talking about, these people are talking
about, that it's just wrong as hell to run a
peacetime situation in a war. In other words, the
idea of giving a man a year tour of duty in Vietnam,
you're against. Do you think that the man should
stay there for the duration and instead of trying
to run it like... Like part of his career, it should
be run as a war. As a war, absolutely. And if he's a
captain and he's doing great things and doing a
magnificent job taking objectives, destroying
the enemy's capability and saving his soldiers'
lives, after six months, promote him. After six
months more, promote him if he's doing a good job.
At the same time, if he isn't, get rid of him. I got
rid of them, but we had no promotion authority. Oh,
none at all. None at all. So that was a bad aspect of
management
of that conflict.
And it hurt the capability of the units. I spent 15
months in the first division going day and night
and I was 40 some odd years old I guess. Now there's
another thing that I'm wondering about when we had
the most number of troops there in 1969 although we
had 560 or so thousand troops there we only had
80,000 troops that were in direct combat We had a
hell of a lot of troops there that were in supply.
Why? This is a much higher ratio than the Second
World War. Well,
again, it gets back to running a peacetime
situation. They even had the inspector general
teams over there coming around inspecting the
units as if you were in the United States.
What the hell kind of business is that? In a wartime
situation, I flew out of battle one day back to
entertain the inspector generals who had been in
the division. But I never noted one damn one of them
up in the battalions that were in contact
anywhere. But it had up our logistics people and
administrative people tied up in knots back there
with the inspector general team. eight or ten
colonels that nobody knew what the hell to do with
that was over there getting their months off in
Vietnam and their headquarters and going back.
The other aspect of this thing had to do with the
number of personnel that were involved in a
civilian in the cords group, rural development
group, the province advisors, and their teams
were all involved in this. I think they counted
those in the non-combat area along with all the
supply people and the huge headquarters that you
had. It's a very interesting thing, even in a
combat division,
small percentage of people get in combat. I
think it's too heavy in our army. I have never been
against
delivering ice cream to soldiers on a battle area,
but I think it's the sort of thing you can get along
without. Do you think, that's another one of the
criticisms, that there were a number of supply
generals who would say that our troops have never
been treated so well in a battle area, our troops,
they can have movies, they can have this, they can
have, when they have R&R, they can go to really nice
places, and this is war, and did you witness how
well, I mean, the idea of trying to give a man out in
the field one hot meal a day, which was policy.
What'd you think about those things, being a World
War II veteran? Well, I, of course, went through
different kind of conditions.
I got no objection to it, as long as it doesn't
interfere with our overall mission of fighting
the war. Did it interfere? I don't think it did. Oh,
good. As far as I'm concerned, it didn't. And also,
I want to assure you that never in the history of
warfare in the history of the world have soldiers,
sailors, and airmen, Marines, ever received such
phenomenal support. as they received during the
Vietnam conflict. It's a result of a great
fluency on the part of our way of life, and I'm
afraid we have pushed ourselves into this soft
requirement area.
We know that we can get along without them because
we did during World War II and to a large degree
during the Korea conflict.
We've brought a lot of this on. This is a reflection
of our society? Of our society. It's just a pure and
simple reflection of it. Now there has been some
statements that a number of officers in Vietnam
went there to get their ticket punched, and I'm
sure that you've heard that. before. They wanted
that on their record because it certainly helped
their careers in promotion. Did you have examples
of, or do you have examples of that? Were there
people like that that you met? If I had any, if I knew
about them, I wouldn't accept them as a commander,
as battalion commanders. The 1st Infantry
Division being the oldest division in the United
States and also being of such great pride, and we
say in the First Division, setting the example for
the rest of the Army. We
were very selective about who comes to that
division in combat, and we turned down hundreds of
officers that tried to get in that division,
including general officers. In fact, the matter
is, one time when there was going to be a division
commander change, the division commander at that
time and myself turned thumbs down on fourteen
different generals coming to that division. No
kidding? Absolutely. You had the power to do that?
We did it. When they sent a general out with orders?
They wouldn't send him out. They'd send his name
over. With a service record? Yeah. And you'd look
through there and you'd say yes or no? I said no. Was
this typical? No. I didn't think so. No, no. How'd
you get away with it? The division commander had
more to say about it than I did. He just showed me the
courtesy of asking me my views.
How did he get away with it? Because a
commander-in-chief, Comus McVie, asked him.
Now you may not get that done anywhere except
unless you got a close relationship between the
division commander and the senior commander in
the field.
And there wasn't anything wrong with these
officers except
their battle experience didn't permit them, we
felt, to serve in the first division. So I'll use
that as an example. say to you that the
first division, when you're in combat, as we were,
you accept what you want and turn down what you
don't want, particularly in the grades of
lieutenant colonel and above.
another aspect of the war concerning officers,
and that is that there's a study done comparing the
percentage of officers to enlisted men in World
War II Korea and Vietnam, and the study found that
twice as high a percentage of officers were in
Vietnam as the other wars, and that there were more
generals per troops than at any other time in
American history. Why? Did it help Well, it goes
back to something I mentioned a little earlier.
Fluency and what you're going to do in a way of
support
for the soldier in the field requires people to do
it. And secondly, never before in any war that I
participated in have we had teams of officers
primarily
at each province and each district in the country
trying to manipulate the mayor and the town
council to get them to bring pressure to bear to get
rid of VC in the area and also to assist the regional
forces and the popular forces to do that. You see,
you had Vietnamese divisions, combat forces like
we have, and then you had regional forces, RF
forces, that's another group, And then you had the
popular forces, which was small groups down in
there. Well, all those had to be officered and
supervised, so this takes a hell of a lot of people
to do it. I'd say three times the effort that you
would normally consider necessary,
and that took a lot of people. There are more
general officers today. Again, our society and
what you have to go through demands that. During
World War II, we had no NATO.
We had no military advisory groups in every
country in the world. We had no JCS, where you got
2,000 today. We're almost all officers. A high
percentage of general is in there. You had no
Department of Defense, which is another three or
four thousand. You had no officers involved in
equal opportunity. You had no officers involved
in human rights. You can run down, you had no
insurance officers. You had no legal officers.
You had no one looking after retired personnel.
You had no one involved in community relations.
You had no one running the Little Leagues and all
the Boy Scouts and the Girl Scouts and all that sort
of thing. But our society had more or less looked to
the military to do that. And somebody, to get it
done, you got to come up with somebody to do it. And
so I can clearly understand the awesome
requirements that's placed on the military, and
you find, again,
more colonels, more generals in headquarters.
Enlisted men are private. Doesn't
contribute a hell of a lot at the cabinet level,
does he? Private. that we just recruited off the
street out here? No, he's about 25 or 30 years away
from that. So, in other words, what you're saying
is that the government is giving the military
expanding responsibilities and bureaucracies,
and therefore they need someone to lead them. And
the staffs of the United States Senate and the
House of Representatives have gone up by more than
1,000%. Why? Because of requirements for more of
this and more of that and a better analysis of what
we're doing than we've ever done before, and
you've got to have somebody to do it. And that's
just what we run into. Okay, now, some people say
that... One problem with expanding the number of
officers in Vietnam is that sooner or later, some
of the army, as you know, had to lower requirements
to get some officers and to get such a number, and
the result was that you got an occasional bad
apple, somebody like
if it wasn't for the fact of decreasing standards
now. What do you say about that? What did you think
of the junior officers that you worked with, or
could you select these two?
We
had an unpublished policy, I guess,
at that time of meeting numbers.
And if it's a policy of meeting numbers,
the fellas, for example, at the artillery school
and graduating second lieutenants from OCS for
the artillery, they may not agree with it and you
may have one or two colonels resign and get out, I
mean retire and get out because they don't like
meeting numbers. Generally speaking, I don't
think anyone does in the Army at meeting numbered
requirements.
But there were people who graduated as second
lieutenants who should not have been. And they
were sent to combat. And many of them failed. Many
of them got relieved and sent out before they
really failed from the standpoint of losing, loss
of life for someone. Some, unfortunately,
may have committed errors that cost lives and
that's it. thing that happens in battle that you
try to avoid at all costs.
What do you do? Do you go short on these people or do
you take a chance?
With me, it's either quality or nothing.
I'm supposed to have 35 officers in a battalion of
500 or 600 men. I'd rather have 15 officers of high
quality because I've got the ingenuity and
experience and know-how to maximize that 15's
capability and overcome the shortage of the 20
that I refuse to accept.
But we had some there that shouldn't have been
there. No question about it. But on the other hand,
let's look at it this way. Out of probably some
30,000 to 40,000 second lieutenants, first
lieutenants that served in that war over eight
years,
one bad apple out of 25,000 to 30,000 had one hell of
a phenomenal damn record, isn't it? One hell of a
phenomenal record. So something must have
happened over there with the commanders for those
that did show up over there that weren't
adequately trained or weren't properly
motivated or that slipped through the system to
meet quotas. Somebody must have done a hell of a job
over there, didn't they? And I think that's
what... really happened. Okay now what about the
enlisted man the one-year tour of duty for the
enlisted man did you did you agree with having the
one-year tour of duty or did you like the officers
would you have thought that duration of the war was
a better way to go about it? Under the conditions in
which they were operating climatically and the
type of enemy that you were fighting and the type of
war that you're fighting I think I think one year
was all right for these, was enough for these young
men.
I would say that for 90% of the officers, but
there's somewhere between 10 and 25% of the
officers that I would have kept over there, and I
say, as long as he's fiddly and mentally sound and
fit, I think he should have been allowed to go home
every once in a while to see his family. I stayed
away from my family three years during World War
II.